The previous sections concerned approximating arbitrary functions using a single polynomial on closed intervals. However, higher-degree polynomials can oscillate erratically; that is, minor fluctuations over the entire range.

We will see a good example of this in Figure 3.14 at the end of this section. 

An alternative approach is to divide the approximation internally into a collection of subintervals and construct a (generally) different approximating polynomial on each subinterval.
	This is called **piecewise-polynomial approximation**

## Piecewise-Polynomial Approximation

The simplest piecewise-polynomial approximation is a piecewise-linear interpolation, which consists of joining a set of data points, 
$$
\{ (x_{0}, f(x_{0})), (x_{1}, f(x_{1})), \dots,(x_{n}, f(x_n)) \}
$$
by a series of straight lines.

A disadvantage of linear function approximation is that it is likely not differentiability at the endpoints of the subintervals, which, in a geometrical context, means that the interpolation function is not "smooth." 
	Often it is clear from physical conditions that smoothness is required,
		 so the approximation function must be continuously differentiable. 

An alternative procedure is to use piecewise polynomial of [[Hermetian]] type. 
	For example, if the values of $f$ and of $f'$ are known at each of the points $x_{0}<x_{1}<\dots<x_{n}$, a cubic hermite polynomial can be used on each of the subinterval $[x_{0},x_{1}], [x_{1}, x_{2}],\dots,[x_{n-1},x_{n}]$ to obtain a function that has a continuous derivative on the interval $[x{_{0}, x_{n}}]$. 
Determining the appropriate Hermite cubic polynomial on a given interval is simply a matter of computing $H_{3}(x)$ for that interval. 
	The [[Lagrange]] interpolating polynomials needed to determine $H_{3}$ are of the first degree, so this can be accomplished without great difficulty. 
		However, to hermite piecewise polynomials for general interpolation, we need to know the derivative of the function being approximated, and this is frequently unavailable.
