
Teams $A$ and $B$ are to play each other repeatedly until one wins two games in a row or a total of three games.

- One way to denote a possibility is 
	- $A$ wins first
	- $B$ wins second
	- $A$ wins third
	- $A$ winds fourth
- Or $A-B-A-A$ 

How many ways can the tournement be played?
***
$10$


Assuming that all the ways of playing are equally likely, what is the probability **five** games needed to determine a winner?
- (probabilty that a we will get winner in 5 games)
***
There are $4$ diffrent cases 
- ($A-B-A-B-A$)
- ($A-B-A-B-B$)
- ($B-A-B-A-B$)
- ($B-A-B-A-A$)
The probability that the five games are need is 
$$P(\text{5 games needes})=\cfrac{4 \text{ (total number of 5 games outcomes)}}{10 \text{ (total number of outcomes)}}$$

## The Multiplication rule

If an operation consists of $k$ steps and 
	the first step can be performed in $n_{1}$ ways
	the second step can be performmed in $n_{2}$ ways [regardless of how the first step was performed]
	...
	the $k^{\text{th}}$ step can be perfirned in $n_{k}$ ways [regardless of how the preceding steps were performed]

Then the entire operation can be performed in $n_{1}\cdot n_{2}\cdot \ \dots \ \cdot n_{k}$ ways

- To apply  the multiplication rule think of the object you are trying to count as the output of a multistep operation.
	- The possibble ways to perform a step may depend on howpreceding steps were performed
		- *but*, the **number** of ways to perform each step must be constant regardless of the action taken in prior steps

#### Example 9.2.2 Counting personal Identification numbers
***
A certain ID number (PIN) is required to be a sequence of any four symbols chosen 
	from the 26 uppercase letters and ten digits 
		(A-Z) and (0-9)

- a) How many different PINS are possible if the repetition of the symbols is not allowed? (*No Repetition*)
***
Intetutively, think of forming a pin as a four step operation where each step involves placing a symbol into one of four positions

- Step 1: Choose a symbol to be put in position 1
- Step 2: Choose a symbol to be put in position 2
- Step 3: Choose a symbol to be put in position 3
- Step 4: Choose a symbol to be put in position 4

So, by multiplication rule $36\times 36 \times 36 \times 36= 1,679,616$ pins in all

Without repretion: $36\times 35 \times 34 \times 33 = 1,413,720$ pins without any characters repeating

- b) What is the probability that a PIN does not have repeated symbol assuming that all pins are equally likely?
***
$$P(\text{ no repets in charater for pin}) = \cfrac{141720}{1679616} \approx 0.8417 $$
- or $84\%$ of pins have no repeated symbol

```ad-seealso
title:Altervative 
Another way to look at pins is a as aordered 4-tuple. 
For example, you can think of PIN **M2ZM** as the ordered 4-tuple (M, 2, Z, M)

Therfore, the total number of PINS is the same as the totla number of ordered 4-tuples whose elements are either letters or digits.

- Derive a general formula for the nu,ber of elements in any Cartesian product of a finite number of finite sets.
```

#### Counting the Number of Iterations of a Nested Loop
***
Consider the folowing nested loop:

$\text{for } i := 1 \text{ to } 4$
	$\text{for } j:= 1 \text{ to } 3$
		$[\text{ statements }]$
	$\text{next }j$
$\text{next }i$

How many times will the inner loop be iterated when the algorithm is implemented and run?

Outter loop is iterated $4$ times, 
	and during each, the inner loop is iterated $3$ times

thus, by multiplication rule the total number of iteration of the inner loop is $4\times 3=12$

## Permutations

A **Permutation** of a set of objects is an ordering of the objects in a row.

For example the set of elements $\{ a, b, c \}$ 
- has six permutations
	- $\{ a, b, c \}, \{ a, c, b \}, \{ b, a, c \}, \{ b, c, a \}, \{ c, b, a \}, \{ c, a, b \}$

number of ways to perform each succesive step is one less that the number of ways to perfirn the preceding step.
$$n(n-1)\times (n-2)\times \dots \times 2 \times 1 = n!$$
In other words, there are $n!$ permutations of a set of $n$ elements.

#### Permutations of Objects Around a Circle
***
With 6 people at a tabel, how many different ways can people sit at a tabel 

- Only relative position matter

So chose indivisual 1 to sit at chair 1.
then consider all arangements of the other indivisuals around that one.

5 indivisuals can be arranged in the seats around the person alredy sitting, so there are $5! = 120$ ways to seat the group of $6$ *Indivisuals*

***

**r-permutaion** - 
	Odered selection of $r$ elements taken from the set of $n$ elements. 
	The number of r-permutations of a set of $n$ elements is denoted $P(n, r)$

If $n$ and $r$ are integers and $1\leq r \leq r$ 
then the number of $r$-permutations of a set of $n$ elemets is given by 



$$
\begin{align}
P(n, r) &= n(n-1) \times (n-2) \times \dots \times (n-r+1) \\
&\text{or} \\
P(n, r) &= \cfrac{n!}{(n-r)!}
\end{align}
$$

Going of the permutations of the set $\{ a, b, c \}$

How many ways are there to select 2 letters from the set and write them in order?

$P(n, r)= P(3, 2)$
called a $2$-permutation of set $\{ a, b, c \}$
$$\{ ab \}, \{ ac \}, \{ ba \}, \{ bc \}, \{ ca \}, \{ cb \}$$

Idea of proof:

Suppose a set of $n$ elements is given.
Formation of an $r$-permutation can be through of as an $r$-step process

Step 1: choose the element to be first.
	since the set has $n$ elements, 
		there are $n$ ways to perform step 1
Step 2: choose the elmenet to be seocnd.
	since the element chosen in step 1 is no longer available, 
		there are $n-1$ ways to perform step 1
Step 3: chppse the element to be third.
	since, neither of the two elements chosen in the first two steps is available, 
		there are $n-2$ choices for step 3 

This process is repeated $r$ times

The number of ways to perform each succesoce step is one less than the number of ways to perfom the preceding step. 

Step $r$ is to choose the elemement to be the $r^{th}$ 
At the point just before step $r$ is perfored $r-1$ elements have alredy been chose, and so there are  $n-(r-1)=n-r+1$ elements to choose from

It follows by the multiplication rule, that the number of ways to perfirm an $r$-permutation is 
$P(n, r) = n(n-1)\times(n-2)\times \dots \times(n-r+1) = \cfrac{n!}{(n-r)!}$
