## Finding the Number to Pick to Ensure a Result

A drawer contains ten black and ten white socks. 
You reach in and pull some out without looking at them.
What is the *least* number of socks 
	you must pull out to be sure to get a matched pair?

#### Solution
***
if you picked just two socks, 
	they may have different colors.

But when you pick a third sock, it must be the same color as one of the socks aleady chosen.

Hence the least number of socks to pull out to get a matched pair is $3$ 

Let the set of socks pulled out be $\{ s_{1}, s_{2}, \dots s_{n}  \}$ 
	and consider the function $C$ that sends each sock to its color

If $n=2$, $C$ could be a one-to-one correspondace (if the two socks pulled out were different colors). 

But if $n>2$ 
	then the number of elements in the domain of $C$ is larger than the number of elements in the image of $C$.

Thus by the pigionhole principle,
	$C$ is one-to-one:
		$C(s_{i})=C(s_{j})\text{ for some } s_{i}\neq s_{j}$ 

This means that if at least three socks are out, at least two of them have the same color.


## Generalized Pigionhole Princeple

For any function $f$ from a finite set $X$ with $n$ elements to a finite set $Y$ with $m$ elements
	and for any positive integer $k$, if $km<n$, 
		then there is some $y \in Y$ such that $y$ is the image of at least $k+1$ distinct elements of $X$ 

#### Contrapositive Form
***
For any function $f$ from a finite set $X$ with $n$ elements to a finite set $Y$ with $m$ elements 
	and for any positive integer $k$,
		if for each $y \in Y, f^{-1}(y)$ has at most $k$ elements
			then $X$ has at most $km$ elements 
				in other words, $n\leq km$ 


Suppose 4 people out of 85 had the same last initial. 
Then at most 3 would share any particular one. 
By the generalized principle (contrapositive form)
This would imply that the total number of people is at most $3\cdot 26 =78$
But this contradicts the fact that there are 85 people in all.
Hence at least 4 peope share a last initial.