***
## Question 1
***
Discuss and critique the statement below. Go beyond ascertaining if the statement is true or false and provide a full discussion.
```ad-note
title:
Let $M$ be a $2 \times 2$ matrix which is not invertible. Is it possible to change <u>just one entry</u> of $M$ so that the resulting matrix is invertible?
```
***
**Solution :**
Suppose $M$ is the singular matrix $M=\begin{pmatrix}1  & 0 \\ 0  & 0\end{pmatrix}$. Matrix $M$ is not invertible because all entries of the bottom row and second column are zero's. 
By the [Invertible Matrix Theorem][https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Invertible_matrix|Invertible Matrix Theorem], an square matrix $A$ is [[Invertible]] or *non-singular* if there exists a matrix $B$ such that,
$$AB=BA=I_{n}$$
If $B$ exists, it is unique and is called the [[Inverse matrix]] of $A$, denoted $A^{-1}$. 

###### Let's list all the equivalent statements given by the Invertible Matrix Theorem:
***
- There is an $n\times n$ matrix $B$ such that $AB = I_{n}=BA$
- $A$ is invertible, that is $A$ has an inverse, is nonsingular, and is nondegenerate
- $A$ is [[Row equivalent|row-equivalent]] to the $n\times n$ [[Identity matrix]] $I_{n}$
- $A$ is [[Column equivalent|column-equivalent]] to the $n\times n$ [[Identity matrix]] $I_{n}$
- $A$ has $n$ [[Pivot positions|pivot positions]] 
- $A$ has [[Full rank|full rank]]; that is $\mathrm{rank}(A)=n$ 
- Based on the $\mathrm{rank}(A)=n$, the equation $Ax=0$ has only the trivial solution $x=0$ and the equation $Ax=b$ has exactly one solution for each $b$ in $K^{n}$
- The [[Kernel|kernel]] if $A$ is trivial, that is, it contains only the null vector as an element, $\mathrm{ker}(A)=\{ 0 \}$ 
- The columns of $A$ are [[linearly independent]] 
- The columns of $A$ [[Span|span]] $K^{n}$
- $\mathrm{Col}(A)=K^{n}$ 
- The columns of $A$ form a [[Basis|basis]] of $K^{n}$
- The linear transformation mapping $x$ to $Ax$ is a [[Bijection|bijection]] from $K^{n}$ to $K^{n}$
- The number zero is not an [[Eigenvalue]] of $A$
- The [[Transpose|transpose]] $A^{T}$ is an invertible matrix (hence rows of $A$ are linearly independent, span $K^{n}$, and form a basis of $K^{n}$)
- The matrix $A$ can be expressed as a finite product of [[Elementary matrices|elementary matrices]] 
***
Conversion of the singular matrix $M$ to become a non-singular matrix can be done by <u>changing just one entry</u>. Lets change a property of the matrix $M$ that aligns with any one of the statement above in the Invertible Matrix Theorem.  We know that the $\mathrm{dim}(M)=2$ and the $\mathrm{rank}(M) = 1$. Let's change the entry $M_{ \ 2,2}$ from its current entry $0$ to $1$.
Lets view the updated matrix $M$
$$M= \begin{pmatrix}
1 & 0 \\
0  & 2
\end{pmatrix}$$
By changing one entry of matrix $M$, we have also changed the $\mathrm{rank}(M)$ from $1$ to $2$. Thus, because the $\mathrm{dim}(A)=2$ and $\mathrm{rank}(M)=2$, the matrix $M$ now is of *full rank*, and therefore is invertible (non-singular). 
But if we have the zero matrix $$Z = \begin{pmatrix}0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0\end{pmatrix}$$denoted by $Z$. 
We can not change one entry of the matrix $Z$ to transform it into a invertible matrix. This is because $\mathrm{rank}(Z)=0$ while $\mathrm{dim}(Z)=2$. We would need $2$ entry changes to transform it into an invertible matrix.

Thus we can conclude given a non invertible (singular) square matrix $D$, it takes a $r=\mathrm{dim}(D)-\mathrm{rank}(D)$ entry changes to convert a invertible (singular) matrix to an invertible (non-singular) matrix. 

## Question 2 
***
Let $W_{3}$ be the matrix below. Ascertain is the matrix is invertible and explain your reasoning. If not, is it possible to change just one entry in $W_{3}$ so that the resulting matrix is invertible? What is the minimum number of entry changes needed to attain invertibility?
$$W_{3}=\begin{pmatrix}
1 & 2 & 3 \\
7 & 8 & 9 \\
4 & 5 & 6
\end{pmatrix}$$
***
**Solution :**
To determine if an matrix is invertible or not, we can compare the properties of matrix $W_{3}$ to the properties listed above in the Invertible Matrix Theorem. $\mathrm{rank}(W_{3})=2$, while the $\mathrm{dim}(W_{3})=3$. Thus from the conclusion of *Question 1*,
```ad-note
title:Conclusion from Solution of Question 1
given a non invertible (singular) square matrix $D$, it takes a $r=\mathrm{dim}(D)-\mathrm{rank}(D)$ entry changes to convert a invertible (singular) matrix to an invertible (non-singular) matrix. 
```
We can, say that it takes 
$$\begin{align}
r&=\mathrm{dim}(W_{3})-\mathrm{rank}(w_{3})\\
1&=3-2\\
r &= 1
\end{align}$$
$r=1$ entry changes to convert the noninvertible matrix $W_{3}$ to an invertible matrix. 
Note: We need to change  one entry in the linearly dependent column of $W_{3}$ to convert it an linearly independent column vector. So we get an $\mathrm{rank}(w_{3})=3$ instead of $\mathrm{rank}(w_{3})=3$. 

The $3^{\text{rd}}$ column of $W_{3}$ is a linearly dependent vector. This is shown by applying the Gauss Jordan method and examining the reduced matrix of $W_{3}$. Shown below is the reduced matrix of $W_{3}$.
$$W_{3}=\begin{pmatrix}
1 & 0  & -1 \\
0 & 1 & 2 \\
0 & 0 & 0
\end{pmatrix}\quad ; \ \text{reduced matrix of } W_{3}$$
Thus, the $3^{\text{rd}}$ column of $W_{3}$, can be described as the following linear combination,
$$\left(\begin{array}{}-1 \\ 2 \\ 0\\\end{array} \right) = -1\left(\begin{array}{}1 \\ 0 \\ 0\end{array} \right)+2\left(\begin{array}{}0 \\ 1 \\ 0\end{array} \right)$$

Furthermore, by examining the reduced matrix of $W_{3}$,  it is shown that $W_{3}$ has $n=2$ pivot positions (analogues to the number of linearly independent column vectors). Additionally, because the reduced matrix of $W_{3}$ is not an Identity matrix $I_{3}$, by the Invertible Matrix Theorem; 

```ad-note
title:Invertible Matrix Theorem

An square matrix $A$ is [[Invertible]] or *non-singular* if there exists a matrix $B$ such that,

$$\begin{align}\\ AB&=BA\\ &=I_{n}\\ \\ \end{align}$$

If $B$ exists, it is unique and is called the [[Inverse matrix]] of $A$, denoted $A^{-1}$. 
```

since a series of elementary row operations on the matrix $W_{3}$, denoted by the elementary matrix $B =  e_{1}\cdot e_{2}\cdot \  \dots \ \cdot  e_{k}$  did not result in an identity matrix $I_{3}$, the inverse $B=A^{-1}$ does not exist. 

Since the $3^{\text{rd}}$ column vector of matrix $W_{3}$ is linearly dependent, changing one entry of this column vector to get an linearly independent vector, will result in a invertible matrix $W_{3}$. 
Lets change entry $W_{3,3}=6$ to $W_{3,3} = 7$, the updated matrix is shown below. 
$$W_{3}=\begin{pmatrix}
1 & 2 & 3 \\
7 & 8 & 9 \\
4 & 5 & 7
\end{pmatrix}$$ 
We now have $n=3$ linearly independent vectors or $n=3$ pivot positions or $\mathrm{rank}(W_{3})=3=\mathrm{dim}(W_{3})$. 
Thus, updating one entry of the noninvertible matrix $W_{3}$ from $W_{3,3}=6$ to $W_{3,3}=7$, transform the matrix into an invertible non-singular matrix with the inverse denoted $(W_{3})^{-1}$ shown below:
$$
(W_{3})^{-1}=
\begin{pmatrix}
\frac{-11}{6} & \frac{-1}{6} & 1\\
\frac{13}{6} & \frac{5}{6} & -2 \\
\frac{-1}{2} & \frac{-1}{2} & 1
\end{pmatrix}
$$

## Question 3
***
Let $W_{4}$ be the matrix below. Ascertain if the matrix is invertible and explain your reasoning. If it is not, is it possible to change just one entry in $W_{4}$ so that the resulting matrix is invertible? What is the minimum number of entry changes needed to attain invertibility? 
$$
W_{4}=
\begin{pmatrix}
1 & 2 & 3 & 4 \\
5 & 6 & 7 & 8 \\
9 & 10 & 11 & 12 \\
13 & 14 & 15 & 16
\end{pmatrix}
$$
***
**Solution :**

Lets dissect the given matrix $W_{4}$.
Using the 
Gauss Jordan Method (or Gaussian Elimination) we can obtain the $\mathrm{rref}(W_{4})$ (reduced row echelon form), as done for $W_{3}$ in *Question 2*. Examining the $\mathrm{rref}$ of $W_{4}$ allows us to determine the $\mathrm{rank}$ of the matrix, anaglous to pivot positions (or number of linearly independent column vectors). Shown below is the $\mathrm{rref}(W_{4})$ 
$$
\mathrm{rref}(W_{4}) =
\begin{pmatrix}
1  &  0  &  -1  &  -2 \\
0  &  1  &  2  &  3 \\
0  &  0  &  0  &  0 \\
0  &  0  & 0  & 0 
\end{pmatrix}
$$
Thus, after examination of $\mathrm{rref}(W_{4})$, 
$$
\begin{align}
\mathrm{rank}(W_{4})&=2\\
\mathrm{dim}(W_{4})&= 4\\
2 &= 4 - 2 \quad \text{by conclusion of Question 1}\\
\end{align}
$$
The given matrix $W_{4}$ without any entry changes is not invertible by the Invertible Matrix Theorem, since $\mathrm{rank}(W_{4})\neq \mathrm{dim}(W_{4})$ and the $\mathrm{rref}(W_{4})\neq I_{4}$.  
It is not possible to change just one entry in the matrix, there need to be $2$ entry changes to convert the given noninvertible matrix $W_{4}$ to am invertible nonsingular matrix.
We can do so by changing the one entry of the $3^{\text{rd}}$ and one entry $4^{\text{th}}$ dependent column vectors. The  $3^{\text{rd}}$ and $4^{\text{th}}$ columns of $W_{4}$ are dependent vectors, because they can be expressed as linear combinations of the $1^{\text{st}}$ and the $2^{\text{nd}}$ columns of $W_{4}$ as shown below;
$$
\begin{align}
\left(\begin{array}{}3  \\
7 \\
11 \\
15 \\
\end{array} \right)
&=-1\left(\begin{array}{}1 \\
5 \\
9 \\
13\end{array} \right) + 2\left(\begin{array}{}2 \\
6 \\
10 \\
14\end{array} \right)
 & &;3^{\text{rd}} \text{ column linear combo}\\
\\
 \left(\begin{array}{}4  \\
8 \\
12 \\
16 \\
\end{array} \right)
&=-2\left(\begin{array}{}1 \\
5 \\
9 \\
13\end{array} \right) + 3\left(\begin{array}{}2 \\
6 \\
10 \\
14\end{array} \right)
 & &;4^{\text{th}} \text{ column linear combo}
\end{align}
$$
Thus if changing the entries $W_{3,3}$ and $W_{4,4}$ from $11$ and $16$ to $1$ and $1$ respectively, will result in a invertible matrix. The updated matrix with the changes is shown below;
$$
W_{4}=
\begin{pmatrix}
1 & 2 & 3 & 4 \\
5 & 6 & 7 & 8 \\
9 & 10 & 1 & 12 \\
13 & 14 & 15 & 1
\end{pmatrix}
$$
Taking the $\mathrm{rref}$ of this updated matrix results in an identity matrix, as shown below, 
$$
\mathrm{rref}(W_{4}) = 
\begin{pmatrix}
1  & 0  &  0  & 0 \\
0  &  1  & 0  &  0 \\
0  &  0  &  1  &  0 \\
0 & 0  &  0  & 1
\end{pmatrix}
$$
To conclude, the change of entries $W_{3,3}$ and $W_{4,4}$ from $11$ and $16$ to $1$ and $1$ respectively and taking the $\mathrm{rref}$ of the updated matrix results in an identity matrix, satisfying the Invertible Matrix Theorem. Therefore the updated matrix is invertible with the inverse denoted $(W_{4})^{-1}$ is shown below;
$$
(W_{4})^{-1}=
\begin{pmatrix}
\cfrac{-28}{15} & \cfrac{11}{10} & \cfrac{-1}{10} & \cfrac{-2}{10} \\
\cfrac{37}{20} & \cfrac{-5}{4} & \cfrac{1}{5} & \cfrac{1}{5}\\ \\
\cfrac{-1}{10} & \cfrac{1}{5} & \cfrac{-1}{10} & 0 \\
\cfrac{-2}{15} & \cfrac{1}{5} & 0 & \cfrac{-1}{5}
\end{pmatrix}
$$