## Rounds

Can I reinstate 5mg Adarall morning and afternoon
- Having a hard time communicating explicitly

I am experencing frustration and experencing diffucilty relaxing

Agitation
	- sensory overload
	- less incentive to properly communicate 
		- (needs works)

Pain aligns with 'Nociplastic pain'
- because regular pain medication dosent help, hennce marijuanna use
	- Could we look at the neurotrophin in my urine or Self-report questionnaires such as the Central Sensitization Inventory[](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Central_sensitization#cite_note-12) and the Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale[](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Central_sensitization#cite_note-13) are also used.[](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Central_sensitization#cite_note-:0-5)

Could I show signs on # Fibromyalgia?

I think it might be beneficial not to look at my metal issues as causes but rather consequences, triggred, which most likely has been dormant in my genes. Thus due to my SEVERE motorcyler accident and my symptons not showing up, indicates they have all been triggred. 



Here is what i am looking for in my meds,

Guanfacine 2mg
Vvayanse 70mg
And a combination of medication that addresses following symptoms...
- chronic pain
- Neuropathy
- Symptoms of Fibromyalgia
- Symptoms of Nociplastic pain
- GAD
- Social Anxiety
- Trauma
- makes me eat like a fucking horse
	- Food is a very important part of my daily life, even with stimulants I consume over 2,000 Kals, daily goal is 3500 as i hit the gym like a mf, control my glucose, my insulin, my degisteive health. I eat about 300g of protien a day, with 115g of fiber idc about carbs, but i include that shit, cuz ya boy dose not want to feel lethargic. Also im on a perma bulk. 

- Increase my blood preasure, The Gabapentin and rtadazone reduce my blood preasure making me feel horiblle, realized the reason i struggle with fights in the night is becasue i dont eat between 3pm-7:30pm not purposefully, but i try to get snacks in, and its makes me severrly aggiated, like yesteraday moring, just took gaba 30 min prior, low blood preasure, my body is sensitive to meds, ive tuned by body to work for me, not you, i know what i need, that is not narsastic, that is know yourself.
- Took tadafil for sexual dysfunction, but it actuqlly illeviated other symptoms also, (low blood preasure, i am geniualienly happy when my blood is floowing, as indicated by my blood labs (I have shitty blood)) Why the fuck am i doing the work of my doctors, FUCK! im angry rn. Sorry relax buddy, they are trying their best. 


Anything sedating (like mirtazapine) tends to make my depression worse. And anything stimulating makes my anxiety worse!

I am a contradictory person. 

So I need my blood please, I am already prone to both cradiovascular disease athsma/high cholestrol, so imagine a lazy river with a lot of people, it gets clogegd up, but increase the flow of the laxy river? give more force, heat the blood, reduce fat in veins, please return my tadafil, hehe

Look at the difference between me writting with Michelle and writting alone at 8pm, it more jumbled, incoherent, non linear. bingo bango . 

Also I want my meds to be first line/ maybe considered 'designer'. I am a risk taker, but also worrdied about the effciacy of these old ass drugs made in the 1800 by fucking union solider like Eli lily, who funiliiiiiii downplays the whithrawl symptoms of his drugs, also NO anti histamines, 
I like my braiin, im smartttt, i dont want fucking demetia, alzhimerz, any of that gay shit.