## Discussion Questions 

## Key Concepts

###### Bisection Method

###### Fixed-Point Iteration

###### Newtons Method

###### Secant Method

###### Method of False Position 

###### Aitken's $\Delta^{2}$ Method

###### Steffensen's Method

###### Muller Method

###### Horner's Method

###### Measure of Error

###### Convergence Rates


## Chapter Review

In this chapter we have considered the problem of solving the equation $f(x) = 0$,
	where $f$ is a given continuous function.

All the methods began with initial approximations 
	and generated a sequence 
		that converged to a root of the equation,
			if the method was successful.

If $[a,b]$ was an interval on which $f(a)$ and $f(b)$ are of opposite sign, 
	then the Bisection method and the method of False Position converged. 

However, we found that the convergence of these methods might be slow.

We Learned that faster convergence was generally obtained using the Secant method or Newton' method.

However, two good initial approximations were required for the secant method
	and one good initial approximation was required for Newton's method.

We found that the root-bracketing techniques such as the Bisection or the False Position method could be used as starter methods for the Secant or Newtons's method.
***
We saw that Muller method 
	gave rapid convergence 
		without a particularly good initial approximations. 

Although it was not quite as efficent as Newton's method,
	its order of convergece near a root was 
		approximately $\alpha = 1.84$
			compared to the quadratic, $\alpha = 2$, order of Newton's method

How ever it was better than Secant method, 
	whose order is approximately $\alpha = 1.62$
		and it had the added advantage of being able to approximate complex roots
	
***
Deflation was generally used with Newton's or Muller's method 
	once an approximate root of the polynomial had been determined. 

We discovered that after an approximation 
	to the root of the deflated equation had been determined, 
		we were able to use either Muller's or Newtons method 
			on the original polynomial 
				with this root as the initial approximation.

This procedure ensured that the root being approximated 
	was a solution to the true equation, 
		not to the deflated equation.
Recommended Muller method for 
	finding all the zeros of polynomials, real or complex.
We noted that that Muller's method 
	could be used for an arbitrary continuous function
***
Other high-order methods are available for determining the root of polynomials.
	Consider Laguerre's method, 
			which cubic convergence and also approximates complex roots 
		or Jenkins-Traub method
		or Brent's method
Another method of interest, **Cauchy's method**,
	is similar to Muller's method 
		but avoids the failure problem of Muller method 
			when $f(x_{i}) = f(x_{i+1})= f(x_{i+2})$, for some $i$.
For an interesting discussion of this method, as well as more detail on Muller's method, [YG], Sections 4.10, 4.11, and 5.4
	





