# Definition 
***
Let $f$ be a function of two variables whose domain $D$ includes points arbitrarily close to $(a, b)$ 
Then we say that the limit of $f(x, y)$ as $(x, y)$ approaches $(a, b)$ is $L$
$$\lim_{(x, y)\rightarrow(a, b)} f(x, y) = L$$
if for every number $\epsilon > 0$ 
	there is a corresponding number $\delta > 0$ such that 
		$$\lim_{{y\rightarrow b} \ : \ {x \rightarrow a}} f(x, y) = L \quad \text{ and } f(x, y) \rightarrow L \text{ as } (x, y) \rightarrow (a, b)$$

## Example #1
***
Show that $\lim_{(x, y)\rightarrow(0, 0)} \cfrac{x^2-y^2}{x^2+y^2}$ does not exist
***
*Solution :*
Let $f(x, y) = \cfrac{x^2-y^2}{x^2+y^2}$ 
First lets approach $(0, 0)$ along the $x$-axis 
Then $y = 0$ gives $f(x, 0) = \cfrac{x^2}{x^2} =1$ for all $x \ne 0$ so,
$$f(x, y) \rightarrow 1 \text{  as  } (x, y) \rightarrow (0, 0)$$ Lets approach along the $y$-axis by putting $x = 0$ 
Then, $f(0, y) = \cfrac{-y^2}{y^2} = -1$ for all $y\ne 0$ so,
$$f(x, y) \rightarrow -1 \text{  as  } (x, y) \rightarrow (0, 0)$$

Since $f$ has two different limits along two different lines, the given limit does not exist. 


## Example #2
***
if $f(x, y) = \cfrac{xy}{x^2+y^2}$, does $\lim_{(x, y)\rightarrow(0, 0)}$ exist?
***
*Solution :*
if $y = 0$, then $f(x, 0) = \cfrac{0}{x^2} = 0$
$$f(x, y) \rightarrow 0 \text{  as  } (x, y) \rightarrow (0, 0)$$
if $x = 0$, then $f(0, y) = \cfrac{0}{y^2} = 0$  
$$f(x, y) \rightarrow 0 \text{  as  } (x, y) \rightarrow (0, 0)$$
<u>Although we have obtained identical limits along the axes,
that does not show that the given limit is 0</u>

Lets, approach $(0, 0)$ along another line,
- since we have already gone up the $x$ and $y$ axis.

If $y = x$, then $f(x, x) \cfrac{x^2}{2x^2} = \cfrac{1}{2}$
thus $f(x, y) \rightarrow \cfrac{1}{2} \text{  as  } (x, y) \rightarrow (0, 0)$

**Since, we have obtained different limits along different paths, the given limit does not exist**

## Example #3
***
if $f(x, y) = \cfrac{xy^2}{x^2+y^4}$ , does $\lim_{(x, y)\rightarrow(0, 0)}$ exists?
***
*Solution:*
Lets save time 
	by letting $(x, y) \rightarrow (0, 0)$ along any line through the origin.

If the line is not the $y$-axis,
	then $y = mx$ 
		where, $m$ is the slope, and 
			$$f(x, y) = f(x, mx) = \cfrac{x(mx)^2}{x^2+(mx)^4} = \cfrac{m^2x^3}{x^2+m^4x^4} = \cfrac{m^2x}{1+m^4x^2}$$
			So, $f(x, y) \rightarrow 0 \text{  as  } (x, y) \rightarrow (0, 0)$ along $y = mx$ 

We get the same result as $(x, y) \rightarrow (0, 0)$ along the line $x = 0$
Thus, $f$ has the same limiting value along every through the origin.
But that does not show that the given limit is $0$.
For now if we now let $(x, y) \rightarrow (0, 0)$ along the parabola $x = y^2$, we have 
$$f(x, y) = f(y^2, y) = \cfrac{y^2\cdot y^2}{(y^2)^2+4} = \cfrac{y^4}{2y^4}=\cfrac{1}{2}$$
for $f(x, y) \rightarrow \cfrac{1}{2} \text{  as  } (x, y) \rightarrow (0, 0)$ along $x=y^2$

**Since different paths lead to different limiting values, the given limit does not exist**

## Example #4
***
Find $\lim_{(x, y)\rightarrow(0, 0)} \cfrac{3x^2y}{x^2+y^2}$ if it exists.
***
*Solution:*
As in example 3, 
the limit along any line through the origin is $0$
This dosent prove that the given limit is $0$

But the limits along the parabolas $y=x^2$ and $x=y^2$ also turn out to be $0$

let $\epsilon > 0$ 
We want to find $\delta > 0$ such that 
If $$0 < \sqrt{x^2+y^2} < \delta \text{ then } \left|\cfrac{3x^2y}{x^2+y^2}-0\right| < \epsilon$$
that is, if $$0 < \sqrt{x^2+y^2} < \delta \text{ then } \cfrac{3x^2|y|}{x^2+y^2}-0 < \epsilon$$
But, $x^2 \leq x^2 + y^2$ 
	Since, $y^2 \geq 0$
		So, $\cfrac{x^2}{(x^2+y^2)} \leq 1$ 
			and therefore, 
			 $$\cfrac{3x^2|y|}{x^2+y^2}-0 \leq 3|y| = 3\sqrt{y^2} \leq 3 \sqrt{x^2+y^2}$$
Thus, if we choose $\delta = \cfrac{\epsilon}{3}$ and let $0 < \sqrt{x^2+y^2} < \delta$, then 
$$\left|\cfrac{3x^2y}{x^2+y^2}-0\right| \leq 3\sqrt{x^2+y^2} < 3\delta = 3\left(\cfrac{\epsilon}{3}\right) = \epsilon$$
Hence the limit is equal to $1$

# Definiton
***
A function $f$ of two variables is called continuous at $(a, b)$ if 
$$\lim_{(x, y)\rightarrow(0, 0)} f(a, b)$$
We say $f$ is **continuous on** $D$ if $f$ is continuous at every point in $D$
- If the point $(x, y)$ changes by a small amount.
	- Then, the value of $f(x, y)$ changes by a small amount.
		- This means that a surface that is the graph of a continuous function has no hole or break.

## Example #5
***
Evaluate $\lim_{(x, y)\rightarrow(1, 2)} (x^2y^2-x^3y^2+3x+2y)$ 
***
*Solution:*
Since $f(x, y)$ is a polynomial, it is continuous everywhere,
- so we can find the limit by direct substitution:
$$\lim_{(x, y)\rightarrow(1, 2)} (x^2y^2-x^3y^2+3x+2y) = 1^2\cdot 2^3 - 1^3\cdot 2^2 + 3 \cdot 1 + 2\cdot 2 = 11$$

# Example #6
***
Where is the function $f(x, y) = \cfrac{x^2-y^2}{x^2+y^2}$ continuous?
***
*Solution:* 
The function is discontinuous at $(0, 0)$ because it is not defined there.
Since $f$ is a rational function,
	it is continuous on its domain,
		which is the set $D = \{(x, y) \ | \ (x, y) \ne (0, 0) \}$ 

# Example #6
***
Let,
$$
g(x, y) = 
\left\{
\begin{array}{ll}
      \cfrac{x^2-y^2}{x^2+y^2} & \mbox{if $(x, y) \ne (0 0)$},\\
      0 & \mbox{if $(x, y) = (0, 0)$}
    \end{array}
  \right.
$$
***
*Solution:*
Here $g$ is defined at $(0, 0)$
	But is still discontinuous 
		because $\lim_{(x, y)\rightarrow(0, 0)} g(x, y)$ does not exist

