So far we have defined $z^{r}$ for a nonzero complex number $z$ and a real number $r$.
The next step is to extend the definition to $z^{w}$ for complex numbers $z$ and $w$.
For example, what would be a reasonable definition for $i^{i}$?
***
The idea we will exploit is that for real numbers $a>0$ and $b$, 
$$a^{b} = e^{b \ln a}$$
To generalize to complex numbers, we nned the complex versions of the exponential and logarithmic functions, and the way to extend from real to complex is to use the power series expansion of the real exponential function,
$$
e^{x} = \sum_{n=0}^{\infty} \cfrac{x^{n}}{n!} = 1+x+\cfrac{x^{2}}{2}+\cfrac{x^{3}}{6}+\cfrac{x^4}{24}+\dots,
$$
	and to construct the logarithm as a properly defined inverse of the exponential. 
In the process we will see that we can do the same for trigonometric functions, so we will extend trig functions from $\mathbb{R}$ to $\mathbb{C}$ as well.

But first, we need to understand  how to add the terms of an infinite list of complex numbers.
## Complex Series 

Let $(a_{n})_{n\geq 0}$ be a sequence of complex numbers.
We use the notation $\sum_{n\geq 0}a_{n}$ for the *series* defined by that sequence.
So far, it is just a fancy way of saying that we have a sequence of complex numbers and we are interested in the summation of all the terms, in the order given by the sequence. 

Since we only know how to add finitely many complex numbers,
	we start by constructing an auxiliary sequence $(s_{n})_{n\geq 0}$ 
		to record the *partial sums*
$$
\begin{align}
s_{0} &= a_{0}  \\
s_{1} &= a_{0}+a_{1} = s_{0}+s_{1}\\
s_{2} &= a_{0}+a_{1}+a_{2}=s_{2}+a_{2}
\end{align}
$$
And so on. More precisely, $s_{0}=a_{0}$ and 
$$s_{n} = a_{0}+a_{1}+\cdots +a_{n-1}+a_{n}=s_{n-1}+a_{n}$$
for all $n\geq 1$
We wont ever be done with adding terms, unless we are dealing with a sequence $(a_{n})_{n}$ that has only finitely many nonzero terms.
In that case, the sequence $(s_{n})_{n}$ of partial sums eventually becomes constant.
But if the sequence $(a_{n})_{n}$ has infinitely many nonzero terms, 
	then the sequence $(s_{n})_{n}$ of partial sums will keep changing every time we add a nonzero term.
Nevertheless, if the sequence of partial sums gets close, and stays close to a certain value (finite or infinite), it makes sense to *assign* that value as the 'sum' of the sequence $(a_{n})_{n}$

## Geometric Series

## Convergence of Series

#### Definition 3.4

#### Definition 3.5

## Test for Divergence 

### Theorem 3.1

## Absolute Convergence

#### Definition 3.6

### Theorem 3.2

## Ratio and Root Tests

### Theorem 3.3

#### Lemma 3.1

## Power Series

## Addition of Series

#### Definition 3.7

#### Proposition 3.1

## Product of Series

#### Definition 3.8

## Examples of Products

##### Example 3.5

##### Example 3.6

## Convergence of Products

### Theorem 3.5
